Documentation: Providers section (#1515)
crossplane/crossplane: docs/providers.md

---
title: Providers
toc: true
weight: 400
indent: true
---

# Providers

Providers are external infrastructure providers such as Amazon Web Services,
Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud and Alibaba Cloud.

In order to provision a resource in the provider, a Custom Resource Definition(CRD)
needs to be registered in your Kubernetes cluster and its controller should
be watching instances of that Custom Resource Definition. Provider packages
contain many Custom Resource Definitions and their controllers to extend
functionality of Crossplane.

Here is the list of current providers:

* [Amazon Web Services][provider-aws]
  * [API Reference][aws-reference]
* [Google Cloud][provider-gcp]
  * [API Reference][gcp-reference]
* [Microsoft Azure][provider-azure]
  * [API Reference][azure-reference]
* [Rook][provider-rook]
  * [API Reference][rook-reference]
* [Alibaba Cloud][provider-alibaba]
  * [API Reference][alibaba-reference]

## Installation

> Since all managed resources are all cluster-scoped, provider packages are

Reviewer: Since all managed resources are ~all~ cluster-scoped

> bundled as `ClusterPackage`s. In order to request installation of a provider,

Reviewer: This might be confusing if you don't know what a ClusterPackage is. Consider just introducing the `ClusterPackageInstall` type like:
The core Crossplane controller can install Provider controllers and CRDs for you through its own provider packaging mechanism, which is triggered by the application of a `ClusterPackageInstall` resource. For example, in order to request installation of the `provider-gcp` package, apply the following resource to the cluster where Crossplane is running:

the following `ClusterPackageInstall` needs to be created:

```yaml
apiVersion: packages.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterPackageInstall
metadata:
  name: provider-gcp
  namespace: crossplane-system
spec:
  package: "crossplane/provider-gcp:master"
```

The field `spec.package` is where you refer to the container image of the
provider. Crossplane Package Manager will unpack that container, register
CRDs and set up necessary RBAC rules and then start the controllers.

There are a few ways that are more convenient than creating a YAML to install

> the providers.

Reviewer: You imply that the `ClusterPackageInstall` is less convenient but it's not clear why. I'd consider structuring this whole section like "You can install a Crossplane infrastructure provider via helm, the crossplane kubectl plugin, or by apply a Crossplane `ClusterPackageInstall` resource." Then you can just bullet point these 3 options out and people can check out the option that sounds like it fits their style. Do we have a preferred means of installing?

Reviewer 2: I suggest we pick our preferred method here and not worry too much about documenting the alternatives. To my knowledge submitting a `ClusterPackageInstall` is our preferred method. I'd slightly prefer recommending the `crossplane package install` command, but that would require the user to have `crossplane-cli` installed.

Reviewer 3: If we can do tabs or similar would be nice to document the 3 install options, so new users are exposed to the crossplane-cli while also understanding that everything can be done with CRs against the Kubernetes API, and that we also offer the convenience of installing optional cluster-scoped packages when installing the Crossplane helm chart.

Reviewer 4: Supporting tabs in the markdown appears to be a little more difficult given our jekyll setup than I originally expected. However, if we get the content to a good place then I could circle back around on Monday and try and move some of the stuff to tabs. For the time-being I have just been doing separate sections but with links to jump to each. I also want to check how jekyll handles `<summary>` in markdown :+1:

You can delete them by deleting the installed `ClusterPackageInstall` resource.

## Configuration

In order to authenticate with the provider API, the provider controllers
need to have access to credentials. It could be an AWS IAM User, GCP Service
Account or Azure Service Principal. Every managed resource like `RDSInstance`
or `CloudSQLInstance` has a field called `spec.providerRef` to refer to what
credentials to use for operations regarding that managed resource. That
reference points to a specific type called `Provider` that contains information
about the authentication method that should be used. A `Provider` resource for
Azure looks like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: azure.crossplane.io/v1alpha3
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: prod-acc
spec:
  credentialsSecretRef:
    namespace: crossplane-system
    name: azure-prod-creds
    key: credentials
```

You can see that there is a reference to a key in a specific `Secret`. The value
of that key should contain the credentials that the controller will use. The
documentation of each provider should give you an idea of how that credentials

> blob should look like.

Reviewer: I think you meant to say "what that credentials blob should look like" or "how that credentials blob should look".

Reviewer: I'm not seeing anything in `provider-gcp` or `provider-azure` that explains how to set up credentials. `provider-aws` has a detailed authentication doc, maybe we should make an `AUTHENTICATION.md` doc a requirement for providers.

Reviewer 2: https://crossplane.io/docs/v0.10/getting-started/configure.html

The current docs include this, but I do like the idea of moving that into an `AUTHENTICATION.md` file in each provider in a future release.

Reviewer 4: +1 to moving auth to each provider. Also think it would be nice to potentially have some of this workflow in the `crossplane-cli`

Keep in mind that it's not a requirement that the authentication should be done
through a credentials blob in a `Secret`. For example, in AWS, `Provider` has
a field called `useServiceAccount` to imply that the provider controller
should use workload identity feature of AWS instead of a `Secret` that contains

> IAM credentials.

Reviewer: Link? https://github.com/crossplane/provider-aws/blob/b3608d666b95b65387dc3802117d01a15959e61e/AUTHENTICATION.md

Do we have equivalent workload identity options for other providers?

Reviewer 2: I believe we only support this for AWS today. It's a somewhat underdeveloped experience that we put into place quickly because our several of users were asking for it. I'd suggest including it as a footnote - i.e. one sentence with a link. Something like:

> The AWS provider includes experimental support for authenticating using a Kubernete service account. See [the documentation for details](https://github.com/crossplane/provider-aws/blob/b3608d666b95b65387dc3802117d01a15959e61e/AUTHENTICATION.md).

Reviewer 4: This also currently requires some additional work due to not being able to run containers as `root`, which is required to access the token that AWS EKS webhook injects. It can still be done but requires doing your own build of `provider-aws`. The current thinking is to wait until this is fixed with projected service account volume in upstream k8s. More info here: https://github.com/crossplane/provider-aws/issues/211

Author: If it's not working as is, I'd prefer removing it. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: @muvaf yeah I think that sounds good for now :+1:

Since each managed resource refers to a `Provider` resource, you can have multiple

> `Provider` resources in your cluster and different managed resources using them.

Reviewer: Is it worth reiterating that this is done via `spec.providerRef`?

Author: I was actually thinking to even include an example small `MySQLServer` managed resource that refers to this provider.

> 

Author: @prasek There are following sections listed in the doc but I couldn't find much that is not addressed above:
```
- Versions
- Multiple Provider Instances
- Referring to a Specific Provider
```

---
title: Providers
toc: true
weight: 400
indent: true
---

# Providers

Providers are external infrastructure providers such as Amazon Web Services,

> Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud and Alibaba Cloud.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that providers extend Crossplane? I suspect people who are not familiar with Crossplane could interpret "provider" in this opening sentence to just mean "cloud provider", without realising that we're talking about providers as a Crossplane concept.

In order to provision a resource in the provider, a Custom Resource Definition(CRD)
needs to be registered in your Kubernetes cluster and its controller should

> be watching instances of that Custom Resource Definition. Provider packages

Reviewer 2: Ranty nitpick: I'd really love to move away from the "instance of a CRD" terminology. To me an "instance of a CRD" sounds like we're discussing a resource of `kind: CustomResourceDefinition`, not an instance of the custom resource defined by the CRD.

Here is the list of current providers:

* [Amazon Web Services][provider-aws]
  * [API Reference][aws-reference]
* [Google Cloud][provider-gcp]
  * [API Reference][gcp-reference]
* [Microsoft Azure][provider-azure]
  * [API Reference][azure-reference]
* [Rook][provider-rook]
  * [API Reference][rook-reference]
* [Alibaba Cloud][provider-alibaba]
  * [API Reference][alibaba-reference]

## Installation

The core Crossplane controller can install Provider controllers and CRDs for you
through its own provider packaging mechanism, which is triggered by the application
of a `ClusterPackageInstall` resource. For example, in order to request
installation of the `provider-gcp` package, apply the following resource to the
cluster where Crossplane is running:

```yaml
apiVersion: packages.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterPackageInstall
metadata:
  name: provider-gcp
  namespace: crossplane-system
spec:
  package: "crossplane/provider-gcp:master"
```

The field `spec.package` is where you refer to the container image of the
provider. Crossplane Package Manager will unpack that container, register
CRDs and set up necessary RBAC rules and then start the controllers.

> There are a few other ways to install to trigger the installation of provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are a few other ways to trigger the installation of provider
```

packages:

* As part of Crossplane Helm chart by adding the following
  statement to your `helm install` command: `--set clusterPackages.gcp.deploy=true`
  It will install the default version hard-coded in that release of Crossplane
  Helm chart but if you'd like to specif an exact version, you can add:
  `--set clusterPackages.gcp.version=master`.
* Using Crossplane kubectl plugin:

>   `kubectl crossplane package install --cluster -n crossplane-system 'crossplane/provider-gcp:master' provider-gcp`

Reviewer 2: If we're going to keep this detail we should probably include a link to the crossplane-cli install docs.

Author: > we should probably include a link to the crossplane-cli install docs.

Updated to link CLI repo.

> If we're going to keep this detail

See my comment above. I'm open to go either way depending on what we want this page to be about.

> You can delete them by deleting the `ClusterPackageInstall` resource you've created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can uninstall a provider by deleting the `ClusterPackageInstall` resource you've created.
```

## Configuration

In order to authenticate with the provider API, the provider controllers
need to have access to credentials. It could be an AWS IAM User, GCP Service
Account or Azure Service Principal. Every provider has a type called `Provider`
that has information about how to authenticate to the provider API. A `Provider`
resource for Azure looks like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: azure.crossplane.io/v1alpha3
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: prod-acc
spec:
  credentialsSecretRef:
    namespace: crossplane-system
    name: azure-prod-creds
    key: credentials
```

You can see that there is a reference to a key in a specific `Secret`. The value
of that key should contain the credentials that the controller will use. The
documentation of each provider should give you an idea of how that credentials
blob should look like. See [Getting Started][getting-started] guide for more details.

> The following is an example usage of Azure `Provider`, referred by a `MySQLServer`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example usage of Azure `Provider`, referenced by a `MySQLServer`:
```
